+++
date = '2025-08-09T13:48:27+01:00'
draft = true
title = 'The Dream of Scipio'
summary = 'The dream sequence from the sixth chapter of the de Re Publica, enlarged by annotations selected from the Late Platonist commentary by Macrobius'
+++
#### The Dream of Scipio, with Excerpts from the Commentary of Macrobius 
*In this short text, found at the end of the fragmentary work of Cicero,* de Re
Publica *, Scipio Aemilianus ascends to the highest heavens, and speaking to his
dead adoptive father, looks down on Carthage, and is told of the glorious
destiny that awaits those who serve their country faithfully in this life. This
mildly bombastic message is somewhat undermined by Scipio Aemilianus'
appreciation that the Roman Empire, which seems so vast, covers only a tiny
portion of the earth's surface, and the earth itself is dwarfed by the stars.
This conception of the universe, where duty is raised to a cosmological level,
where the stars occupy a greater portion than the sublunar material world, is
clearly heavily influenced by Stoic physics and ethics. Notably, there is no
underworld in this universe. As Macrobius astutely points out - we are already
in hell.*

Scipio: When I had come into Africa as tribune to the fourth legion, serving
under Manius Manilius (all this you well know) nothing was of greater importance
to me than meeting Masinissa the king, most closely connected to our family for
good reasons. When I came to him, the old man embraced me and wept, and after a
little while he looked up to the heavens and said "I thank you, O great Sun, and
you, the other heavenly bodies, that, before I leave this life, I see in my
realm and in these very walls, P Cornelius Scipio (i.e. Scipio Aemilianus), by
whose name itself I am made brand new, while the memory of that most excellent
and unconquered man (i.e. Scipio Africanus), never leaves my heart. Then, I
questioned him about his kingdom, and he me about our Republic, and with much
talk on either side the whole day was spent for us just like that.

But in the evening, being royally received, we prolonged our talking deep into
the night; while the old man spoke of nothing but Africanus, remembering fondly
not only his deeds but his sayings too.

After this, when we separated for the night, both after my journey and as I had
sat up till late at night, sleep folded me in a closer embrace than was usual.

> MACROBIUS: Between the books of of Plato and Cicero, which both treat of the
> republic, my son Eustachius, sweetness and glory of my life, we noted this
> difference in passing, that the first set out plans for organising a state,
> the other delineated one already existing. The first, an ideal state, the
> second, a government long established by his ancestors.


Then there appeared to me,—for my part I believe, out of what we had been
talking about: for it often happens that our thoughts and conversations give
birth in sleep to some such fancy as that which Ennius records about Homer, of
whom, to be sure, in his waking moments he was wont to think and talk very
often— there appeared to me Africanus, in that form which was more familiar to
me from his picture than from his person. When I recognised him, I shuddered, I
assure you, but he said: "Be of good courage and banish fear, my Scipio, and
record what I shall say.

Do you see that city, which although forced by my arms to yield obedience to the
Roman people, is reviving the recollection of the wars of old and cannot rest in
peace,"—now he was showing to me Carthage, from a place on high, full of stars,
and bright and shining—, "that city, to attack which you are now coming almost
as a private soldier? Within these two years you will destroy it as Consul; and
that title, which so far you bear as an inheritance from me, shall be won for
you by your own achievement. But when you hast razed Carthage, celebrated a
triumph, held the office of Censor, and travelled on a mission over Egypt,
Syria, Asia Minor and Greece, you will be elected Consul a second time though
abroad; and you will bring a most important war to its close, you will utterly
destroy Numantia. But when you ride in your car of triumph to the Capitol, you
will find the state sorely troubled by the plotting of my own grandson.
Here, Africanus, you must display to the fatherland the light of your courage,
genius and wisdom.

But in that time, I see the march of destiny, so to call it, hesitating between
two ways. For, when your life has completed seven times eight full cycles of the
sun; and these two numbers, each of which for a different reason is held to be a
perfect number, in the revolution of nature has fulfilled your destined sum for
you; to you alone and to your name the whole community will turn together: the
Senate, all right-thinking citizens, the allies and the Latins will fix their
eyes on you; you will be the one man on whom the community can lean for safety;
and, in short, as Dictator you must reform the constitution, if only you can
escape from the unnatural violence of your relations,"

At this point, Laelius having cried out and all the others groaned exceedingly,—
"Hush! please," said Scipio with a gentle smile, "lest you rouse me from my
sleep, and listen a while to the rest.

" But still, Africanus, so that you may be the readier to defend the
Constitution, know this: for all who have preserved their fatherland, furthered
it, enriched it, there is in heaven a sure and allotted abode, where they may
enjoy an immortality of happiness.

For nothing happens in the world more pleasing to that supreme Deity, who
governs all the universe, than those gatherings and unions of men allied by
common laws, which are called states. From this place do their rulers and
guardians set out, and to this place do they return." 

Here, although I was greatly terrified, by dread not so much of death as of
treachery from men of my own household, I found courage to ask if he was himself
alive and my father Paulus and others, whom we regarded as dead. "Yes indeed
they are alive," said he, "who have soared away from the bonds of the body, as
from a prison-house; but your life, as it is called, is really death. Nay, look
at Paulus, your father, coming towards you!" On seeing him I shed a flood of
tears, but he folded me in his embrace and by kisses endeavoured to stop me
weeping.

And, so soon as I began to be able to speak, having choked back my tears, "Pray,
tell me," said I, "most revered and best of fathers, since this is life, as I
hear Africanus say, why do I linger on earth? Why don't I hurry up and come to
you there?" "It is not as you think," said he, "for unless that God, to whom all
this region that you can see belongs, has released you from the keeping of your
body, the entrance to this place cannot be open to you. For men were created
subject to this law, to keep to that globe, which you see in the centre of this
region and which is called the Earth; and to them a soul was given formed from
those everlasting fires, which you mortals call constellations and stars, that,
round and spherical in form, alive with divine intelligences, complete their
orbits and circles with marvellous swiftness. So, my Publius, you and all good
men must allow the soul to remain in the keeping of the body, nor without his
command, by whom it was given to you, must you leave your human life, lest you
should appear to have deserted the post assigned to men by God.

But rather, my Scipio -- like your grandfather here, like me your sire -- follow
justice and natural affection, which though great in the case of parents and
kinsfolk, is greatest of all in relation to our fatherland. Such is the life
that leads to heaven and to this company of those who have now lived their lives
and released from their bodies dwell in that place which you can see,"— now that
place was a circle conspicuous among the fires of heaven by the surpassing
whiteness of its glowing light—"which place you mortals, as you have learned
from the Greeks, call the Milky Way." And as I surveyed them from this point,
all the other heavenly bodies appeared to be glorious and wonderful,—now the
stars were such as we have never seen from this earth; and such was the
magnitude of them all as we have never dreamed; and the least of them all was
that planet, which farthest from the heavenly sphere and nearest to our earth,
was shining with borrowed light, but the spheres of the stars easily surpassed
the earth in magnitude—already the earth itself appeared to me so small, that it
grieved me to think of our empire, with which we cover but a point, as it were,
of its surface.

And as I gazed upon this more intently, "Come!" said Africanus, "how long will
your mind be chained to the earth? Do you see into what regions you have come?

See! the universe is linked together in nine circles or rather spheres; one of
which is that of the heavens, the outermost of all, which embraces all the other
spheres, the supreme deity, which keeps in and holds together all the others;
and to this are attached those everlasting orbits of the stars. Beneath this
there lie seven, which turn backwards with a counter revolution to the heavens;
and of these spheres that star holds one, which men on earth call Saturn's star. 

Next is that bright radiance, rich in hope and healing for the sons of men,
which is called Jove's star; then one fiery red and dreaded by the world, which
you call Mars; next lower down the sun holds nearly the middle region, the
leader, chief and ruler of the other lights, the mind and ordering spirit of the
universe, of such magnitude that he illumines the whole and fills it with his
light. With him Venus and Mercury keep pace as satellites in their successive
spheres; and in the lowest zone of all the moon revolves lighted up by the rays
of the sun. 

Now below these there is nothing more but what is mortal and transient except
those souls which the bounty of the Gods has given to the sons of men; above the
moon all is eternal. As for the earth, the ninth and central globe, it does not
move but is the lowest point, and towards it all heavy bodies tend by their own
gravity."

And, as I gazed on these things with amazement, when I recovered myself: "What,"
I asked, "what is this sound that fills my ears, so loud and sweet?" "This," he
replied, "is that sound, which divided in intervals, unequal, indeed, yet still
exactly measured in their fixed proportion, is produced by the impetus and
movement of the spheres themselves, and blending sharp tones with grave,
therewith makes changing symphonies in unvarying harmony. For not only is it
impossible that such vast movements should sweep on in silence; but, by a
natural law, the outermost parts on the one side give a grave, and on the other
a sharp sound. Wherefore the highest of all, the celestial zone equipped with
stars, whose revolution is more swift, moves with a sharp, high note; while this
one of the moon, as it is the lowest, with the deepest tone of all. For the
earth, which is the ninth, remaining motionless is ever firmly planted in one
spot, clinging closely to the centre of the universe. Now the revolutions of
those eight spheres, of which two have the same power, produce seven sounds with
well-marked intervals; and this number, generally speaking, is the mystic bond
of all things in the universe, And learned men by imitating this with stringed
instruments and melodies have opened for themselves the way back to this place,
even as other men of noble nature, who have followed godlike aims in their life
as men.

But the ears of men overpowered by the volume of the sound have grown deaf; and
you have in you no duller sense than that of hearing; for instance, at the
Catadupa as it is called, where the Nile rushes headlong from very high
mountains, the tribe which dwells near that spot, owing to the loudness of the
noise has lost the sense of hearing. But this sound of the whole universe
revolving at the utmost speed is so awful that the ears of men cannot contain
it; just as you are unable to look straight: at the sun, and your eyesight and
its perceptions are overpowered by his rays."

Though marvelling at these wonders I still kept turning my eyes at intervals
towards the earth.

Thereupon: "I see," said Africanus, "that you are even now regarding the abode
and habitation of mankind. And if this appears to you as insignificant as it
really is, you will always look up to these celestial things and you won't worry
about those of men. For what renown among men, or what glory worth the seeking,
can you acquire? You see that on the earth only scattered and narrow plots are
inhabited; while even in the very patches, as it were, in which men dwell, vast
deserts are interspersed; and among those who live on the earth, there are not
only such breaks that no communication can pass from one set to another, but
some live in opposite zones; some on opposite sides of a zone; some even at the
opposite point of the earth to you; and from these, at any rate, you can expect
no glory.

Moreover you see that this earth is girdled and surrounded by certain belts, as
it were; of which two, the most remote from each other, and which rest upon the
poles of the heaven at either end, have become rigid with frost; while that one
in the middle, which is also the largest, is scorched by the burning heat of the
sun. Two are habitable; of these, that one in the South—men standing in which
have their feet planted right opposite to yours—has no connection with your
race: moreover this other, in the Northern hemisphere which you inhabit, see in
how small a measure it concerns you! For all the earth, which you inhabit, being
narrow in the direction of the poles, broader East and West, is a kind of little
island surrounded by the waters of that sea, which you on earth call the
Atlantic, the Great Sea, the Ocean; and yet though it has such a grand name, see
how small it really is!

And yet of these very lands, which are frequented and familiar, could your name
or that of any of your race have climbed beyond the summit of the Caucasus here
or crossed the waters of the Ganges there? Who in the other remote regions of
the rising or the setting sun or of the North or South will hear your name? Yet,
leaving these aside, you can certainly see in what a narrow field your human
glory aspires to spread. Again, the very men who talk of you, how long will they
talk?

Why, even if those generations of men to come should care to hand down, in
succession from father to son, the glory of each one of us; yet, still, owing to
the deluges and conflagrations of the earth, which must happen periodically, we
cannot acquire a lasting, much less an eternal renown. Nay, what does it matter
that mention should be made of you by those who shall be born hereafter, when
there was none among those who were born before you? They were not fewer in
number but were, at any rate, better men; 16. the more so, as, among those very
men, by whom our name may possibly be heard, no one can secure his reputation
for a single year. Men, to be sure, commonly measure the year by the return of
the sun, that is of a single heavenly body: but when all the constellations
together shall have returned to the same point from which they once started; and
after long intervals shall have restored the order of the whole heaven as it was
before, then can that really be called the year of revolution: in which I hardly
dare to say how many generations of men are comprehended. For as at that time,
when the soul of Romulus made its way into these heavenly regions, the sun
appeared to men to disappear and to be darkened, so whenever, in the same
quarter and at the same time, the sun is again eclipsed, then, all the
constellations and stars having been restored to their original position, you
can say that a year has been fulfilled. But of this year know that as yet not a
twentieth part has come round.

So, should you have lost hope of return to this place, on whom great and
illustrious men rest all their hopes, what then is your human glory worth, which
can hardly affect a scanty portion of a single year? Therefore, if you will
choose to look aloft and fix your gaze on this our resting-place and eternal
home, nor ever enslave thyself to the rumours of the rabble, nor stake the hope
of your life on the rewards of men: virtue must draw you by her own attraction
to true glory; what others say of you, let that be their own concern; but still
they will talk.  However, all that talk of theirs is both confined within those
narrow bounds, which you can see, and has never been of long continuance in the
case of any. It is buried with the men themselves, and ends in the forgetfulness
of posterity."

When he had ended: "For my part," said I, "Africanus, if indeed a pathway, as it
were, is open to the gates of heaven for those who have deserved well of their
native land; although I have not failed to do you honour, from my boyhood t
reading in my father's footsteps and in yours, yet now, with so great a prize
before me, much more watchfully will I strive." 

"Strive indeed," said he, "and be persuaded of this: it is not you that are
mortal, but this body. For you are not that which your bodily form presents to
view, but it is the mind of any man that is the man, not that figure which can
be pointed out by the finger. Know then that you are a god; since he is a god
who possesses force, feeling, memory and prescience, who directs, governs, and
moves that body, of which he is the master, just as much as the supreme God of
all moves this universe.  And as the universe which is in some degree perishable
is moved by God, who is himself eternal, so is the frail body moved by an
immortal soul.

For that which moves all the time is eternal; but that which imparts motion to
something else and itself receives its motion from some other source, must have
a limit to its life because its motion can end. Therefore that only which moves
of itself, because it never abandons itself so it never ceases to move. Moreover
this is the source, this is the original cause of motion to all other things
that move. 

Now an original cause has no origin; for all things originate from it, but the
original cause itself cannot arise from anything else. For it would not be an
original cause if it had originated from something else. And as it has no origin
so it never perishes. For if the original cause once perish it will neither be
itself reproduced by another nor will it create another from itself; since all
things must necessarily spring from the original cause. Hence we see that the
original cause of motion resides in that, which is itself self-motive. Now that
can neither be born nor die; otherwise the whole heaven and all nature would
collapse and come to a standstill, nor would it find any power to give it the
first impulse of motion.

Since therefore it is plain that what is self-motive is eternal, who can deny
that this quality is an attribute of our souls? For, whereas everything is
soulless that receives its impulse from without, that, on the contrary, which
has a soul, moves by an inward motivation of its own. For this is the natural
property and essence of the soul.  And if this is the only thing in the world
that is self-motive, assuredly it has had no beginning but is eternal.

Exercise this soul in the noblest activities. Now the noblest are cares and
exertions for our country's welfare.  And the soul which has been enlivened and
trained by these will speed more fleetly to this its resting-place and home. And
this will it do more readily if, even while still imprisoned in the body it
strains beyond it, and, surveying that which lies outside it, as much as
possible, endeavours to withdraw itself from the body. 

For the souls of those who have given themselves over to the pleasures of the
body, and have yielded themselves to be their servants, as it were, and at the
prompting of those lusts which wait upon pleasures have broken the laws of God
and man; when they have glided from their bodies, go grovelling over the face of
the earth; nor do they return to this place, except after many ages of
wandering."

So he departed, and I woke from my dream.